README.md, before:

# Dacti Project

This repository is a sandbox workspace for building the "dacti" metaverse object format.

Dacti itself refers to the "dacti package" and "dacti object" specification. It is a work-in-progress object format for describing the visual representation of data, and attaching functionality to that data, in an and extensible way that's easy to support *gradually*.

The name "dacti" comes from the lojban word describing something as being a material object enduring in space-time.

> 🚧 Everything in this workspace is not ready for production use. All formats, implementations, and other details are subject to change at any time. If you want to try out elements in this workspace regardless for testing and validation purposes, coordinate with the maintainers.

## Dacti Objects

The dacti object speficiation can be used for objects 'at rest'. For example, when stored on a file system, or sent to applications as a file. The object specifications can be used both to describe the entirety of an object, and to describe a subset of an object, or a replicated mirror of an object for a client to display.

## Dacti Packages

The dacti package speficiation can bundle a collection of data, which can be indexed and subdivided with simple offsets. This package format allows you to bundle an object specification together with its data in one file, to store and transfer objects in a self-contained way. As well, the offset indexes allow you to bundle a large collection of objects and data in a file, that can be fetched sparsely using [HTTP range requests](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Range_requests).

## Pterodactil

Pterodactil is a CLI toolkit for working with dacti formats.

## Dacti Viewer

To explore the development of this format, this repository contains a reference viewer implementation. This viewer may be eventually split out and renamed to become its own application in the future.

## Building Standalone JS Library

This project uses wasm-bindgen to create the JS bindings around the WebAssembly based package. To generate the package for use in projects, run `wasm-pack build` in the JS crate's directory. See the [wasm-pack documentation](https://rustwasm.github.io/docs/wasm-pack/) for more information.

You do not need to build the library manually for the web example.

## Related Projects

- [Daicon Containers](https://github.com/open-mv-sandbox/daicon): Dacti uses daicon as the base for its binary formats.

## License

Licensed under either of

- Apache License, Version 2.0 ([LICENSE-APACHE](LICENSE-APACHE) or http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
- MIT License (Expat) ([LICENSE-MIT](LICENSE-MIT) or http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

at your option.

Commit message:

Migrate ptero out of repository, and add specification

README.md, after:

# Dacti Project

Dacti is a modular format for describing metaverse objects and packaging metaverse data.

The name "dacti" comes from the lojban word describing something as being a material object enduring in space-time.

[Read the dacti specification draft here!](docs/index.md)

## Dacti Objects

The dacti object speficiation can be used for objects 'at rest'. For example, when stored on a file system, or sent to applications as a file. The object specifications can be used both to describe the entirety of an object, and to describe a subset of an object, or a replicated mirror of an object for a client to display.

## Dacti Packages

The dacti package speficiation can bundle a collection of data, which can be indexed and subdivided with simple offsets. This package format allows you to bundle an object specification together with its data in one file, to store and transfer objects in a self-contained way. As well, the offset indexes allow you to bundle a large collection of objects and data in a file, that can be fetched sparsely using [HTTP range requests](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Range_requests).

## Related Projects

- [Daicon](https://github.com/open-mv-sandbox/daicon): Dacti uses daicon as the base for its binary formats.

## License

Licensed under either of

- Apache License, Version 2.0 ([LICENSE-APACHE](LICENSE-APACHE) or http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
- MIT License (Expat) ([LICENSE-MIT](LICENSE-MIT) or http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

at your option.
