docs/daicon.md, before:

# Daicon Container Format

> 🚧 *This is a working document, describing a work-in-progress format. Nothing described in this document should be seen as final. Features described in this document may not be implemented yet, or differ from as described.*

Daicon containers are a wrapping file format, made to make file self-description and versioning easier. They let a file format describe itself using a UUID and semantic version. Additionally, they provide a flexible way to define named and versioned regions of data in the file, called "interfaces".

| Key | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Name | Daicon Container Format |
| Version | 0.1.0-draft 🚧 |

## Motivation

Daicon containers are designed, but not exclusively for, containing metaverse objects and object data in a way that allows flexible interoperability and direct addressing. This use case presents a few requirements that many other formats don't provide:

- Backwards and forwards compatibility. If the design of a format changes, or a new format comes in vogue, the interface system allows formats to adapt while still providing interfaces for older systems.
- Easy to parse. Daicon containers are extremely easy to parse in any language, even without dynamic memory. The surface area of the standard is also intentionally very low, meaning no special cases or obscure extensions you need to support for full coverage.
- Low overhead. A format based on daicon containers is just 68 bytes larger than the raw interface. This one bullet point alone is over two times larger.
- Inner type metdata and versioning. Besides identifying and versioning interfaces, a format that uses daicon containers can also be uniquely identified by the header, including backwards and forwards compatibility for minor versions.
- Direct addressing. Daicon containers do not require any special parsing or decompressing at a container level to access the inner data. This is delegated to the inner interfaces which may, in the case of "dacti packages" for example, decide to only do compression at a per-object level. This allows areas to be directly addressed through, for example, [HTTP Range Requests](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Range_requests).
- Cache coherency. Daicon is designed to work well with CDN and edge caches. Derived formats can append additional data and update atomically without needing to invalidate the entire file.

## Using Daicon for a Format

Daicon is intended to be used as the basis for other file formats. This allows a format to be extended, versioned with backwards compatibility, and metadata to be interpreted by common tools.

### Creating a Format

When you use daicon containers for your format, you need to randomly generate a UUID to identify your format with. It is recommended that you pick a unique extension for your file.

You should then define which interfaces, and their minimum versions, your format **requires**. These interfaces can be re-used between different formats, in fact, the use of standard interfaces is recommended.

### Updating a Format

If you create a new version of your format, you need to follow semantic versioning. This means that if you increase the minor version but not the major version, software created for the previous minor versions should be able to load the file.

For example, this means you can increase the minimum minor version of an interface. But, you cannot increase the required major version, or decrease the required minor version of an interface. If you want to do this anyways, you will have to add it as an *additional* requirement, in addition to the old one.

To allow this method of backwards compatibility, you are allowed to include multiple major versions of interfaces. If you find yourself needing to include multiple *minor* versions, you are likely not correctly following semantic versioning.

### CDN Cache Coherency

Daicon containers are designed for efficient cache coherency on CDNs and edge caches. To achieve this they allow for derived formats that use daicon containers to include padding for append-only updates.

If your format will be used for this, you can use the "offset" and "size" values in the index table as atomic switches, after appending or relocating data and validating all caches have been updated. You are recommended to define padding data in your format's specification to make this possible.

### Reducing Round-Trips

If your format will be fetched *partially* from a server, and then indexed using ranges, your format specification should include recommendations to reduce necessary round-trips.

For example, you can recommend (or even require) an index interface describing regions contained in your file to exist within the first 64kb. This would allow a client aware of your format to always fetch the full first 64kb and not need additional round-trips to the server.

Not all interfaces have to fall in this region, only those that need this 'fast-path'. You are recommended to specify that clients should degrade performance rather than fail if the included interfaces' data exceeds the specified region.

If you implement this, you are recommended to pad the additional space in this region, reserving it, to allow the file to be updated without a full cache flush. You should also pad the interface table for the same reason.

You are not required to perform this padding, and in fact, if your file will not be updated like this you are recommended to *not* do it to avoid unnecessary overhead.

## Daicon Format

Daicon containers are made up out of multiple sections.

| Bytes | Description |
| --- | --- |
| 8 | signature |
| 20 | format |
| 4 + (N * 36) | interface table |
| ... | inner data |

### Signature

Unless already validated by another system, implementations should start by reading the first 8 bytes, the magic signature, and validate it.

| Bytes | Description |
| --- | --- |
| 8 | "daicon00" magic prefix |

This should match exactly. Future incompatible versions may change "00". An implementation reading a different number there should reject the file as incompatible.

For interoperability reasons, you should not change this signature for your own format, instead use the type UUID in the format section.

### Format

| Bytes | Description |
| --- | --- |
| 16 | type UUID |
| 2 | version major |
| 2 | version minor |

The type UUID is equivalent to an inner MIME-Type. Formats that use daicon containers have file extensions and MIME-Types of their own, it is repeated here for validation, and for if this information is not otherwise available.

### Interface Table

A short header defines how many interfaces will be described.

| Bytes | Description |
| --- | --- |
| 4 | count |

Following this, you will find `count` amount of interfaces.

| Bytes | Description |
| --- | --- |
| 16 | type UUID |
| 2 | version major |
| 2 | version minor |
| 8 | offset in bytes |
| 8 | size in bytes |

The offset and size describe the location of the interface in the file. Interface regions **MAY** overlap.

> ⚠️ Always validate all offsets and sizes.

Interfaces are arbitrary binary data, and how they are interpreted is decided by the specific format using daicon containers. Derived formats are encouraged to reuse standard interface specifications where possible.

> ⚠️ Interfaces are not required to pack tightly. A file can, and commonly will, contain much more data than just the interface data regions.

#### Duplicates

Multiple entries with the same UUID are distinct, as long as their *major* versions are different. Multiple entries with the same UUID *and* major version are not valid, and the parser **MUST** reject this.

This **SHOULD** enforce that there is no situation where continuing to read a table will change the interfaces already found, and an implementation can decide to early-bail if it has found the interfaces it needs.

### Inner Data

After these sections, the rest of the file contains arbitrary data. For example:

- Interface regions, containing the interface implementations
- Data regions indirectly referenced by interfaces
- Extended data used by future versions of this specification

## Required Standard Interfaces

> 🚧 Required standard interfaces interfaces are a dubious feature, and only included as of now for feedback.

Interfaces are intended to be defined by derived format specifications, but some daicon features are implemented through interfaces and *must* be supported by a reader.

They are not required to be present in a daicon file, and writers are not required to support them.

### Table Extension Interface

> 🚧 Table extensions are a dubious feature, and only included as of now for feedback.

The recommendations set by "CDN Cache Coherency" and "Reducing Round-Trips" could result in a daicon container running out of 'slots' for interfaces even when more are needed. To both prevent this in the first place, and degrade rather than fail in the worst case, you can use table extensions.

| Key | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Name | Table Extension |
| Version | 0.1.0-draft 🚧 |
| UUID | 37cb72a4-caab-440c-8b7c-869019ed348e |

Table extensions have the same format as the interface table, without the "count" header. The count should be derived from the size in bytes divided by the size per table entry.

Table extensions can be recursive. Duplicates and loops are recommended against, but this is not enforced by this specification. A reader should track which tables it has already read, and **MUST NOT** follow duplicates.

Readers are not required to follow extensions if found interfaces match the requirements for "early-bail" described in the interface table section. If found interfaces do not match these requirements, a reader **MUST** follow extensions, or direct the caller to fetch additional data to do so.

You can decide to relocate the table entirely by having only one entry in the main table, containing this interface.

## Glossary

### Semantic Versioning

Version numbers in this standard use [Semantic Versioning 2.0.0](https://semver.org/). For example, an interface implementation that supports reading an interface format version of at least version "2.1", can read an interface format version of "2.4", but not "3.0" or "2.0". The "patch" version is not included, as this refers to bug-fixes, and should only be used to version an interface's specification.

> A package version with a major of "0" should always be assumed to be mutually-incompatible with other minor versions. Implementations against these versions of this specification or interfaces should verify supported minor versions individually.

Commit message:

Move extension to table header

docs/daicon.md, after:

# Daicon Container Format

> 🚧 *This is a working document, describing a work-in-progress format. Nothing described in this document should be seen as final. Features described in this document may not be implemented yet, or differ from as described.*

Daicon containers are a wrapping file format, made to make file self-description and versioning easier. They let a file format describe itself using a UUID and semantic version. Additionally, they provide a flexible way to define named and versioned regions of data in the file, called "interfaces".

| Key | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Name | Daicon Container Format |
| Version | 0.1.0-draft 🚧 |

## Motivation

Daicon containers are designed, but not exclusively for, containing metaverse objects and object data in a way that allows flexible interoperability and direct addressing. This use case presents a few requirements that many other formats don't provide:

- Backwards and forwards compatibility. If the design of a format changes, or a new format comes in vogue, the interface system allows formats to adapt while still providing interfaces for older systems.
- Easy to parse. Daicon containers are extremely easy to parse in any language, even without dynamic memory. The surface area of the standard is also intentionally very low, meaning no special cases or obscure extensions you need to support for full coverage.
- Low overhead. A format based on daicon containers is just 76 bytes larger than the raw interface. This one bullet point alone is over two times larger.
- Inner type metdata and versioning. Besides identifying and versioning interfaces, a format that uses daicon containers can also be uniquely identified by the header, including backwards and forwards compatibility for minor versions.
- Direct addressing. Daicon containers do not require any special parsing or decompressing at a container level to access the inner data. This is delegated to the inner interfaces which may, in the case of "dacti packages" for example, decide to only do compression at a per-object level. This allows areas to be directly addressed through, for example, [HTTP Range Requests](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Range_requests).
- Cache coherency. Daicon is designed to work well with CDN and edge caches. Derived formats can append additional data and update atomically without needing to invalidate the entire file.

## Using Daicon for a Format

Daicon is intended to be used as the basis for other file formats. This allows a format to be extended, versioned with backwards compatibility, and metadata to be interpreted by common tools.

### Creating a Format

When you use daicon containers for your format, you need to randomly generate a UUID to identify your format with. It is recommended that you pick a unique extension for your file.

You should then define which interfaces, and their minimum versions, your format **requires**. These interfaces can be re-used between different formats, in fact, the use of standard interfaces is recommended.

### Updating a Format

If you create a new version of your format, you need to follow semantic versioning. This means that if you increase the minor version but not the major version, software created for the previous minor versions should be able to load the file.

For example, this means you can increase the minimum minor version of an interface. But, you cannot increase the required major version, or decrease the required minor version of an interface. If you want to do this anyways, you will have to add it as an *additional* requirement, in addition to the old one.

To allow this method of backwards compatibility, you are allowed to include multiple major versions of interfaces. If you find yourself needing to include multiple *minor* versions, you are likely not correctly following semantic versioning.

### CDN Cache Coherency

Daicon containers are designed for efficient cache coherency on CDNs and edge caches. To achieve this they allow for derived formats that use daicon containers to include padding for append-only updates.

If your format will be used for this, you can use the "offset" and "size" values in the index table as atomic switches, after appending or relocating data and validating all caches have been updated. You are recommended to define padding data in your format's specification to make this possible.

### Reducing Round-Trips

If your format will be fetched *partially* from a server, and then indexed using ranges, your format specification should include recommendations to reduce necessary round-trips.

For example, you can recommend (or even require) an index interface describing regions contained in your file to exist within the first 64kb. This would allow a client aware of your format to always fetch the full first 64kb and not need additional round-trips to the server.

Not all interfaces have to fall in this region, only those that need this 'fast-path'. You are recommended to specify that clients should degrade performance rather than fail if the included interfaces' data exceeds the specified region.

If you implement this, you are recommended to pad the additional space in this region, reserving it, to allow the file to be updated without a full cache flush. You should also pad the interface table for the same reason.

You are not required to perform this padding, and in fact, if your file will not be updated like this you are recommended to *not* do it to avoid unnecessary overhead.

## Daicon Format

Daicon containers are made up out of multiple sections.

| Bytes | Description |
| --- | --- |
| 8 | signature |
| 20 | format |
| 12 + (N * 36) | interface table |
| ... | inner data |

### Signature

Unless already validated by another system, implementations should start by reading the first 8 bytes, the magic signature, and validate it.

| Bytes | Description |
| --- | --- |
| 8 | "daicon00" magic prefix |

This should match exactly. Future incompatible versions may change "00". An implementation reading a different number there should reject the file as incompatible.

For interoperability reasons, you should not change this signature for your own format, instead use the type UUID in the format section.

### Format

| Bytes | Description |
| --- | --- |
| 16 | type UUID |
| 2 | version major |
| 2 | version minor |

The type UUID is equivalent to an inner MIME-Type. Formats that use daicon containers have file extensions and MIME-Types of their own, it is repeated here for validation, and for if this information is not otherwise available.

### Interface Table

A short header defines how many interfaces will be described.

| Bytes | Description |
| --- | --- |
| 8 | extension |
| 4 | count |

Following this, you will find `count` amount of interfaces.

| Bytes | Description |
| --- | --- |
| 16 | type UUID |
| 2 | version major |
| 2 | version minor |
| 8 | offset in bytes |
| 8 | size in bytes |

The offset and size describe the location of the interface in the file. Interface regions **MAY** overlap.

> ⚠️ Always validate all offsets and sizes.
| 8 | extension |
| 4 | extension count |

Interfaces are arbitrary binary data, and how they are interpreted is decided by the specific format using daicon containers. Derived formats are encouraged to reuse standard interface specifications where possible.

> ⚠️ Interfaces are not required to pack tightly. A file can, and commonly will, contain much more data than just the interface data regions.

#### Duplicates

Multiple entries with the same UUID are distinct, as long as their *major* versions are different. Multiple entries with the same UUID *and* major version are not valid, and the reader **MUST** reject this.

This **SHOULD** enforce that there is no situation where continuing to read a table will change the interfaces already found, and an implementation can decide to early-bail if it has found the interfaces it needs.

#### Extension

If not null, the extension descibes the location of another interface table. This is to allow the recommendations in "CDN Cache Coherency" and "Reducing Round-Trips" to be followed without limiting extensibility.

A reader **MAY** decide not to read the extension table if it has already read the interfaces required by the format. If this is not the case, a reader **MUST** follow the extension, or inform the caller it must do so.

### Inner Data

After these sections, the rest of the file contains arbitrary data. For example:

- Interface regions, containing the interface implementations
- Data regions indirectly referenced by interfaces
- Extended data used by future versions of this specification

## Examples

Examples of how to define format and interface specifications on top of dacti.

> ⚠️ These are not standardized specifications, do not use these.

### Interface Specification

This example interface specification describes the presence of unstructured generic text data.

| Key | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Name | Text Example |
| Version | 0.1.0-draft 🚧 |
| UUID | 37cb72a4-caab-440c-8b7c-869019ed348e |

The contents of the interface region is UTF-8 text data. Null characters should be considered invalid data and an implementation **MUST** reject these.

## Glossary

### Semantic Versioning

Version numbers in this standard use [Semantic Versioning 2.0.0](https://semver.org/). For example, an interface implementation that supports reading an interface format version of at least version "2.1", can read an interface format version of "2.4", but not "3.0" or "2.0". The "patch" version is not included, as this refers to bug-fixes, and should only be used to version an interface's specification.

> A package version with a major of "0" should always be assumed to be mutually-incompatible with other minor versions. Implementations against these versions of this specification or interfaces should verify supported minor versions individually.
